[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology greetings everyone and welcome
to church history and theology as we
look into the subject of false teachers
and false teachings arising in the
church
the topic or at least the title of
today's lesson really comes from Paul's
own lips as he is near the end of his
third missionary journey in the late 50s
and it is titled wolves will
arise it is always a fascinating thing
to me that people have taken Solace
throughout church history and even yes
today in the modern Church in saying I
have this leader or that leader or we
follow this person or that bishop or
this church institution and they take
their Solace from that I want to present
to you the biblical argument that Paul
makes to the church in Ephesus uh I want
to do this because it provides for us a
way to look into a singular group of
people and uh from a single Apostle to
to hear the encouragements to hear the
warnings to hear the the fences and the
protection that a church can place
around themselves and individuals can
place around themselves as well because
obviously if we are dealing with the
promise and that is exactly what the
title of this uh this lesson is wolves
will arise that
promise shows us that we on need to be
on guard we need to be aware of those
who merely appear as sheep but are
indeed ravenous wolves uh it is no
protection as we will learn to Simply
take solace in a legitimacy of office
because as we will also see the Wolves
will arrive from among legitimate
offices in the church Elders deacons
respected people in the church will
prove in time to be false teachers how
do we deal with that do they cease to be
that or do they stay in uh charge there
if they have disciples does that make
them legitimate or is it possible that
Christians can often times be led astray
by Wolves to their own demise all of
these things will be answered and this
is really what we're dealing with this
uh this evening here on church history
and Theology and it's one of the more
fascinating warnings that has come down
to us in the church the reason I wanted
to limit it only to the church in
Ephesus is because we have so much told
to us about the Church of Ephesus with
regards to this now you may think that
I'm going directly to the book of
Ephesians but we will actually not even
be in the book of Ephesians until the
very end of this lesson uh because the
vast majority of the warnings to the
church in Ephesus take place towards the
leaders of the Church of Ephesus and uh
and that I want to to show you more than
anything uh there's a reason also why
the Church of Ephesus more than any
other it is because Paul invested more
in the leadership and in the church in
Ephesus than any other church he wrote
more to the Church of Ephesus than any
other church he wrote uh he spent more
time in the Church of Ephesus than any
other church at least as far as
scripture is concerned
you have nearly 3 years of one of his
missionary Journeys is spent in emphasis
you have his farewell address in Acts
chapter 20 which is if you have your
Bible and you're not watching the video
version of this you can go ahead and
turn to Acts
20 he also writes to one of the elders
in the Church of Ephesus that's Timothy
in both 1 and second Timothy and he
writes an entire epistle to the church
named Ephesus uh the church of Ephesian
you know the the book of Ephesians all
of
this to express to
us there is a definitive way that we can
look at the qualities of false teachers
and there is a definitive way that we
can see how Paul presents this to the
leaders a single leader on two different
occasions and to the church as a whole
as far as how they can protect
themselves when these wolves come
up this is this is something that is
extraordinarily uh necessary throughout
the the church because as we go into
church history we are going to as as you
well know our goal is to pull wisdom
from the church's history and from our
brothers and sisters who have gone from
before us wisdom does not always come in
the way of good examples wisdom also
comes in the way of warnings from Bad
examples don't do it this way and we
have seen the church throughout the ages
handle false teachers in very wrong ways
that are not consistent with a
scriptural record things like taking up
the sword things like using Civil
Authorities to impose against Heretics
whether to bring Civil Disobedience
excommunication from even the towns or
even to the point of capital punishment
and death and the burning at the stake
of Heretics these things will come down
to us but we must not set aside how the
scriptures tell us we must interact with
false teachers and you know to kind of
give away the end burning Heretics at
the stake is not one of them picking up
the sword of the state is not one of
them appealing to the Civil Authorities
to enact punitive measures is not one of
them we are told what to do it's very
clear we are also told more importantly
how to protect ourselves from becoming
false teachers or from following false
teachers you can't actually stop false
teachers that that's I think that's the
the place we need to start because a lot
of people's approach to false teachers
is thinking that we can stop them one
way or the other you can't not unless
you violate the own commands towards how
to deal with false teachers yourself the
scriptures give us very clear guidance
on how to deal with this and most of it
is very introspective most of it is very
definitive with regards to avoiding them
and teaching others to avoid them it is
not in trying to fix the false teacher
we'll see it so uh as we go through this
again uh not just the book of Ephesians
1 and 2 Timothy as well and Acts 20 so
those going to be mainly our focuses uh
tonight and this is uh this is a great
place for us to start and that is Acts
chapter 20 because Paul is making his
appeal uh his farewell address to the
Ephesian elders and I want you to see it
uh if you're following along the video I
will actually have it in a new format
here on the screen for you all the
passages that I'll be dealing with
with Paul at the tail end of his third
missionary journey it is about the year
57 he is passing through the outskirts
of Asia Minor and this is myus um which
is you know near the near the coast or
actually is a coastal city and he sends
word from myus to Ephesus and calls the
Elders of the church to come to him now
again I'll simply point out Elders
always plural the there are multiple
leaders in this church Timothy would
have been one of them um all of them
come down from Ephesus to myus to sit
and talk with Paul um again the church
in Ephesus holds a very unique place in
Paul's heart he is not he is not just
treating them differently because
they've earned this or what not these
are personal friends and confidants of
Paul and so when he's in myus he calls
down to them please come down and see me
and he gives them his farewell address
as he expresses is most likely the last
time that he will see
them let's read this it's Acts chapter
20 I want to read the whole thing and
then we're going to back up to it
because I don't think many people ever
sit down and actually deal with this uh
entire thing so let's let's read
this acts 201 17-8 uh 38 now from myus
he sent to Ephesus and called the Elders
of the church to come to him and when
they came to him he said to them you
yourselves know how I lived among you
the whole time from the first day that I
set foot in Asia serving the Lord with
all humility and with tears and with the
trials that happened to me through the
plots of the Jews how I did not shrink
from declaring to you anything that was
profitable and teaching you in public
and from house to house testifying both
to Jews and Greeks of repentance toward
God and of faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ and now behold I am going to
Jerusalem constrained by the spirit not
knowing what will happen to me there
except that the Holy Spirit testifies to
me in every that imprisonment and
afflictions await me but I do not
account my life of any value nor as
precious to myself if only I may finish
my course and the ministry that I
received from the Lord Jesus to testify
to the gospel of the grace of God and I
behold I know that none of you among
whom I have gone about proclaiming the
kingdom will see my face again therefore
I testify to you this day that I am
innocent of the blood of all for I did
not shrink from declaring to you the
whole counsel of God pay careful
attention to yourselves and to all the
flock in which the Holy Spirit has made
you overseers to care for the Church of
God which he obtained with his own blood
I know that after my departure Fierce
wolves will come in among you not
sparing the flock and from among your
own selves will arise men speaking
Twisted things to draw away the
disciples after them therefore be alert
remembering that for 3 years I did not
cease night or day to admon pun everyone
with tears and now I commend you to God
to the word of his grace which is able
to build you up and to give you an
inheritance among all those who are
Sanctified I coveted no one's silver or
gold or apparel you yourselves know that
these hands ministered to my necessities
and to those who are with me in all
things I have shown you that by work
working hard in this way we must help
the weak and remember the words of the
Lord Jesus how he himself said it is
more blessed to give than to
receive when he had said these things he
knelt down and prayed with them all and
there was much weeping on the part of
all they embraced Paul and kissed him
being sorrowful most of all because of
the word that he had spoken that they
would not see his face again and they
accompanied him to the
ship it's a nerve-wracking story it's
one of those things that Paul as he's
coming to the end of his life uh takes
up the same habit that he has had
through throughout his entire life is
that of encouraging admonishing and
warning as he continues to um perceive
his the risk of what will happen to him
when he comes to Jerusalem we know that
when he lands in um in cesaria By the
Sea that he is warned by the prophet
agabus that if he goes all the way to
Jerusalem he is going to be captured put
on trial and brought before Caesar and
that's exactly what happened in in
Jerusalem when he finally got there um
Paul knows that the risk is pretty high
he doesn't know exactly what's going to
happen that we have this fascinating
little turn of phrase here that uh the
Holy Spirit testifies to him in every
city what imprisonment and afflictions
await me I I often point out how how
difficult would it be to follow the lord
if everywhere he tells you the the
difficulties and the suffering and the
failures that you're going to have to
endure before you do them and then says
okay now go into the city I mean they're
going to Stone you in here go ahead and
give them the gospel you know they're
going to put you in prison here and beat
you and fog you go ahead and go preach
that is that is a remarkable uh
Testament to the tenacity of Paul and
his faith in Christ no matter what was
going to go
on uh can't say as though I have a faith
that is that tested and that advanced
but uh my goodness um what a what a
testament anyway but here he is seeming
to say he is going he doesn't know
what's going to happen and so he's
giving them his last
appeal the last thing that he says to
them and one of the main ones is to look
at this group of Elders that he knows
very personally after many years of
ministry together and to say among you
will rise false teachers
wolves that will destroy the
sheep and what a what a fascinating
thing to say I mean here he says it in
verse 29 I know that after my departure
Fierce wolves will come in among you not
sparing the
flock how is it we protect ourselves
from
this I mean we're all sheep yes even
leaders of the church or sheep we don't
have the ability to react back as with
equal force as wolves sheep can't really
fight wolves it doesn't work that way um
this is one of the reasons why we have a
lion as the head of our church uh we do
not have the ability to fight wolves on
our own but we as sheep do have the
ability to avoid wolves and to warn the
other sheep where the wolves are and who
the wolves are and to stay away from
them that one over there is dressed as a
sheep it's not a sheep it's a wolf it's
there and it's going to destroy you and
make no mistake about it Paul will make
this this Clarity to say that
wolves represent a a destructive force
in the life of a church such as a uh or
excuse me these false teachers represent
such a destructive force in the church
similar to how a wolf would enter into a
sheep fold what are they going to do
they're going to eat the
Sheep they're going to scatter
them the Sheep are not growing and
feeding and eating they're being
[Music]
eaten real leaders in the church do not
fear to feed the sheep the word of God
that he left for
them real
unherd do not Sherk back from their
responsibilities to these things they do
not allow sheep to wander they keep them
where the food
is this is what we're going to see over
and over again that false teachers in a
myriad of ways help sheep wander and
starve them and give them something else
something that is not the the grace of
God something that is not the scriptures
something that is
not consistent with the gospel here Paul
makes multiple references you can see in
verse 21: 24 and 25 his Focus here is
always the gospel right see here in
verse
21 he was for three years testifying
both to Jews and to Greeks repentance
toward God and of faith in our Lord
Jesus
Christ skip ahead as well verse 24 but I
do not account my life of any value nor
is precious to myself if only I may
finish my course and the ministry that I
reive from the Lord Jesus to testify to
the gospel of
grace and now I behold I know that none
of uh you among whom I have gone about
proclaiming the kingdom will see my face
again what you know and so what does he
say I'm innocent of the blood of
all the gospel El has been
delivered how is it he has the gospel it
is the whole counsel of God it is the
word of God you're going to see it
played out directly here look at verse
27 for I did not shrink from declaring
to you the whole counsel of God
everything that God has said I have
given to you because we know that we do
not live on bread alone we live on
everything that proceeds from the mouth
of God we do not avoid any part or any
piece of the word of God we teach
everything that God has revealed when
God has revealed truth we do not shrink
back from it this is exactly what Paul
is saying to them he is saying not only
have I done that to you you need to do
that for the church that is what
legitimate teachers do they're
conduits of the revelation of
God they are passing along the word they
are not determiners of
it they recognize it for what it is and
they give it to the church the Sheep
need to eat it is what unders Shepherds
do but in verse 28 Here Comes one of the
biggest warnings
ever pay careful attention to
yourselves and to all the flock in which
the Holy Spirit has made you
overseers you are overseers to care for
the Church of God pi careful attention
to yourself why because any one of
us could prove in time to be a false
teacher now does that mean we open up
the door with losing salvation no no no
no we're talking about whether there
proves to be an anyone us of us an evil
and unbelieving heart we can be self-
deceived yes as leaders of the church we
can deceive others and other leaders of
the church and we as parts of the flock
can be just as led astray by a wolf as
anyone else and so what does he tell
them to do as the Elders of the church
as the first Elders of the church in
Ephesus pay careful attention to
yourselves and to all the
flock in which the Holy Spirit has made
you overseers to care for the Church of
God which he obtained with his own blood
and he says why I know that after my
departure Fierce wolves will come in
among you not sparing the flock and you
say okay that's a that's a pretty Stark
warning wolves are going to come into
the church and then he reveals something
even more terrifying and that is verse
30 from among your own
selves will arise men speaking Twisted
things to draw away the disciples
Christians after
them from among your
own
selves this means that legitimate
overseers Bishops pastors whatever you
want to call them the this this college
of leaders in the
church them holding that office does not
in any way prevent them from proving to
be a false teacher and a
wolf the first warning that I'm going to
put out to the church is this just
because somebody is a pastor or a bishop
or a pope or elder or whatever you call
them
does not insulate the risk in any way of
being a
wolf the succession does not pass
through the office it passes through
whether or not they are teaching what
Accords with sound
Doctrine there are entire churches that
insist that what is passed down into the
church what is protecting the church is
Apostolic
succession but Apostolic succession is
absolutely worthless without right
Doctrine and right Doctrine is far more
important than right
ordination I will say that forever and
ever you according to the legitimacy of
what is taught in scripture is more
significant than who ordained you or
whether or not it was done in a proper
practice you teaching what Accords to
the faith once delivered for all the
gospel given the gospel of grace and not
teaching Twisted things is far more
important than whether or not you were
legitimately ordained
somewhere sorry the office is no
protection against
wolves there are entire churches that
have Arisen up to insist that and to say
that our church is legit because it has
this or that pedigree that goes all the
way back to the apostles well first of
all that succession of Apostles is not
expressed in any way as being bound to
the office the succession of the
Apostles is their writings and all those
who teach what Accords to the doctrines
therein it is not relegated to One Elder
or multiple
Elders the job is relegated to them but
the authority is in the
scriptures the office is relegated to
the elders Bishops overseers always
plural no matter how you cut
it but whether or not they hold that
office legitimately is dependent upon
what they
teach if they speak Twisted things they
are not sheep and they are not
legitimate
elders and so here Paul Paul is warning
the Ephesian Elders from among their own
selves will arise men speaking Twisted
things and they can draw away sheep
after
them and he says to them he gives them a
prescription therefore be alert
remembering that for three years I did
not cease night or day to admonish every
one of you with tears and now what does
he commend them
to I commend you to God and to the word
of his grace which is able to Build You
Up and to give you the
inheritance among all who are
Sanctified what is the
force behind the
strength of the legitimacy that the
leaders of the church will continue to
have but their submission to God and His
word now true it is the scriptures are
still being written during the olic age
but the New Testament the vast majority
of it was known agreed upon and
identified as inspired scripture before
the close of the first
century here we see Paul saying not only
the Old Testament but the New Testament
scriptures as they are coming together
the Gospel of Luke is about to be
written the gospel of Mark most likely
already was several of Paul Paul's own
writings have already been written but
in the next about 10 years in the
Ephesian Elders experience the apostles
as they're about to
die uh 10 years from this point write a
a great Corpus of
literature to represent their Authority
for the rest of the church's
history Peter identifies Paul's writings
as scripture Paul identifies the Gospel
of Luke as script R literally 2 years
after it was written the these things
are are incredibly Central and important
to the life of the church and he is
telling these Elders he says this is how
you're going to protect and sanctify
yourselves it is going to be by
submission to the Lord and to the word
of his grace it is able to build you up
it is able to give you an inheritance
among all those who are
Sanctified it is centrally
important well it doesn't stop
uh it excuse me it doesn't stop at just
the warning to the Ephesian elders but I
wanted to spend some time looking at the
warnings directly to a singular Elder in
the Church of Ephesus and that is
Timothy Paul writing to Timothy one of
the Ephesian Elders specifically in the
years to come uh after the Farewell
Address is centrally important for the
church in how to understand the warnings
against false teachers as well as the
qualifications for legitimate teachers
uh there's a reason why when you when
you come to the scriptures and say how
is it that you make a selection for an
elder why you go to First Timothy 3
first because 1 Timothy 3 is the main
list of qualifications for a legitimate
leader in the church well in addition to
that there's all sorts of other warnings
in the book of First Timothy about false
teachers and what their habits are what
their life looks like what they teach
how they do these things what the
results of their Ministry is how to be
on
watch well as he says to um
Timothy and our first passage here is
found in 1 Timothy chapter 3 excuse me
chapter 1:
3-7 what is it that the false teacher
looks like he warns him he says as I
urged you when I was going to Macedonia
remain at Ephesus so that you may charge
certain persons not to teach any
different
Doctrine this is going to be a recurring
theme in Paul's warnings to the Ephesian
elders and specifically to Timothy one
of the Ephesian
Elders false teachers teach different
doctrines that's
it that is their main goal they want to
teach something erroneously they want to
teach something that will obvious ref
uscate or lead away from and help sheep
wander away from the simple truth of the
doctrines of
scripture he expresses specifically to
them that
this teaching of different
Doctrine will often times come with the
habit of verse 4 in 1 Timothy
1 he says to warn against certain
persons not to devote themselves to
myths endless genealogies promoting
speculations rather than the stewardship
from God that is by
faith we are to at all points be on the
lookout for those who are
wandering church leaders are not
supposed to wander off into myths we are
not supposed to extrapolate beyond what
God has revealed in his truth when the
scriptures are silent we must take take
our cue from that when they speak we
must take our cue from that when they
say something clear let's go with it
this doesn't mean that we don't use
wisdom and we apply the the methods of
scripture to the practicalities of life
but this does mean that once we get into
speculation once we get into
philosophies once we get into things
that are far more complicated that we
simply cannot
know these are not times for us to
become dogmatic on things that the
scripture knows nothing
about there are many churches throughout
history that have wandered off into the
ether wandered off into myths wandered
off into different doctrines things that
the scriptures know nothing
about and then they have to come back
and reinterpret the scriptures to make
them match their wandering myths you
can't do that the scripture has to be
what normalizes you not the other way
around we are to approach the scriptures
as servants as hungry sheep this is our
food this is what God has left for us
man does not live on bread alone but by
everything that proceeds from the mouth
of God and here in Holy scripture we
have what proceeds from the mouth of
God this is his
word and it is able to grow us up it is
able to sanctify us it is able to
protect us from one becoming FAL
teachers and two following false
teachers a sheep that is satisfied with
the Green Pastures that God has provided
for us in scripture will much less be at
risk of following a wolf that says
there's greener pastures over there in
that
Valley we will know the power of the
word of God we will know it's
Clarity we will know the sufficiency
that it has that it is given us through
faith in Christ a good
conscience Paul warns that false
teachers these wolves that he has been
warning them about that Timothy
certainly heard about as he was visiting
Paul in myus in verse 6 he says certain
persons here in 1 Timothy 1 certain
persons swerving from these these things
from good consciences and sincere Faith
the stewardship that is from God
swerving from all of these things they
have wandered away into vain discussions
Desiring to be teachers of the law
without understanding either what they
are saying or the things about which
they make confident assertions this I
think is one of the most destructive of
all and that is a false teacher that
does not know he is a false teacher
there's more of
them than the ones who know that they're
false teachers they are self
deceived they look into the scriptures
for a way to make their myths
legitimate they look for a way to twist
the doctrines of the Apostles into
something that would back them up rather
than coming to the scriptures as
servants
as we always
want the fear should always be
self-referential first am I a false
teacher how do I approach the scriptures
have I taught doctrines different than
what the apostles
taught have I wandered off into myths
has my institutional Church wandered off
into myths that it then seeks to replant
backwards reread backwards into
scripture is my church built out of the
scriptures or is my church built on
something else and then we use
scriptures as a tool but the church at
the end is what's really in
charge or our leaders or our history or
our
traditions this is one of the ways that
I um I talked to some of the people in
in my church uh expressing to them you
know one of the one of the great ways
that you can litmus test this is have
you come across something in Scripture
that you naturally disagree with and yet
you lay aside your natural wisdom for
the wisdom of scripture will you lay
aside your tradition when scripture
shows you something
else it's a super important question the
next part of First Timothy we'll look at
is verse or is chapter 4:
1-3 after Paul had introduced this
reality that uh false teachers are going
to arise we always need to be on the
lookout as he has said to him in in in
chapter 1: 3-7 in 1 Timothy 4: 1-3 he
reminds again there is a warning that
the spirit has always said that in the
latter times uh that is by the way the
times of Paul and Timothy all the way
down to our own day we live in the
latter times in uh in the later times
some will depart from the Faith by
devoting themselves to deceitful spirits
and teachings of
demons through the insincerity of liars
whose consciences are
seared who forbid marriage and require
abstinence from foods that God created
to be received with Thanksgiving by
those who believe and know the
truth this is uh kind of a fascinating
uh example of this but it's pretty
simplistic in the way he explains this
out but God deceptively so because
there's a bit of history behind some of
this now I don't want to get into
speculations about what exactly Paul is
referencing here other than to say we
can take his broad teachings against the
idea that being severe to your body or
abstaining from certain practices
whether marriage or food things that God
has made in this world is going to make
you more
spiritual there are those who will arise
in church history as we go forward that
will teach such things saying things
like virginity is better than marriage
or more morally Superior I think of jome
for instance uh who will teach this and
then this will take on and take a
enormously influential uh role in the
Roman Catholic church or require
abstinence from Foods there's certain uh
second century groups that would arise
and teach
uh
vegetarianism right forbidding marriage
there was those who arose that um that
taught the same thing that was the
Shakers for instance later on um those
who forbid marriage to uh to clergy for
instance these things are warned about
here in 1 Timothy
4 the idea is that in these latter times
some will depart from the
faith there is a a a Simplicity to the
faith that is deceptively simple but
every false teacher will eventually just
wander
away they will wander away from these
things because they're not satisfied
with what God has given to them and I
will say this time and again keeps
coming up in church history it is the
issue of whether or not what God has
said is sufficient for you or
not are the scriptures sufficient for
you are they sufficient for the church
or need we have more
has God spoken or not does adding to his
word make us truth tellers or
Liars does pulling away from his word
make us truth tellers or
Liars are the scriptures
sufficient or are they merely just there
as a one of our
tools well if they're there as one of
your tools nothing is going to stop you
from wandering
away because scripture is the only thing
that will keep you AR writed
because there are things in the world
like deceitful Spirits things that make
appearances
apparitions teachings of
demons that doesn't mean teachings about
demons that means teachings from
them if you start wandering off into
things there is no limit if scripture
cannot fix you or your church or your
church leaders there is no limit to the
depravity that will come out of your
church or your church leaders or
yourself and there is basically nothing
that you will not devise and
believe through the insincerity of liars
he says here in the next verse in verse
two uh this is first Timothy 4:2 of
liars whose consciences are seared who
forbid marriage and require abstinence
from foods that God created to be
received with Thanksgiving by those who
believe and know the
truth this is something that Paul has
addressed on multiple occasions this
idea of
asceticism um it is a false humility a a
uh I'm going to give away all my money
and that will make me more spiritual I'm
going to not eat any meat and that will
make me more spiritual I'm going to not
get married and that will make me more
spiritual all of these are errant
teachings God made marriage God made sex
god made Foods these things are to be
received with
Thanksgiving they are to be taken
orderly they to be taken properly they
are to be treated biblically and when so
they are not lesser than something
else this concept of aestheticism will
dramatically infect the church in the
4th
Century it will turn clear
teachings that we find in the previous
chapter here in 1 Timothy 3 that church
leaders are required to be
married into the broad habit especially
in the western church of they will not
be because clerical celibacy will now be
practiced in 99% of
circumstances which if you ask me makes
a leader
illegitimate as we move forward through
first Timothy we come to chapter
6 1 Timothy chap 6: 3 through 10 again
another set of warnings about
this and he starts off at the same place
if anyone teaches different
doctrine that is not consistent with the
words of Jesus Christ the apostles the
scriptures
Etc what does he say exactly if anyone
teaches a different Doctrine and does
not agree with the sound words of our
Lord Jesus Christ in the teaching that
Accords with godliness he is puffed up
with conceit and understands nothing it
doesn't matter how much sense he makes
it doesn't matter how popular he is it
doesn't matter if people call them Saint
or Church Father or anything if they are
teaching a different Doctrine than what
the Lord Jesus Christ himself
taught and the teaching that Accords
with godliness specifically the
apostolic
message as it again becomes cified in
the New Testament the Old Testament all
of these things
if this person will not take correction
even from that and instead insists on
doctrines that they knew nothing about
in the first
century that the apostles never taught
that Christ never taught that the
scriptures never taught that person is
by very definition puffed up with
conceit and understands
nothing and again he warns Timothy he
says that kind of person has an
unhealthy craving for controversies and
for quarrels about words I can't tell
you you the amount of times that I have
gotten um that I've gotten
people taking something very clear in
scripture such as for instance um the
absolutely
undeniable teaching in Scripture that
Jesus had blood brothers and
sisters if you can read Greek it's plain
as
day I don't care how many people try to
interpret any which way I know what I
can read
it's plain as day they are named they
are listed out on multiple occasions and
then the only defense is to come back
and go yeah but a word somewhere
somewhere in the Old Testament can mean
something a little bit different
therefore the plain reading of scripture
is not able to fix our
teaching because they want to protect a
later concept about the Virgin
Mary the problem is that all it does is
it reads nothing but quarrels about
words see here's the
thing the teachings of scripture are
really
clear it can be translated into
different
languages and the simple sense of the
words can bring life to the hearers as
God gives them ears to
hear the scriptures are not too
complicated the scriptures are clear and
they Define for us the very heart of God
and the glory and the Manifest Glory
that he
has but once you get into it and go you
know what I want to do is I want to
insert my doctrines in here somehow I
want to insert my teachings in here
somehow and so I'm going to I'm going to
parse out this word or that word and
then make the plain sense of the text
completely the opposite of what it's
saying you are the one in the wrong
because what is the production of this
Envy dissension slander evil suspicions
and constant friction among people this
is what false teachers
make they do it in a variety of ways but
they are devoted to this depraved in
mind deprived of the truth imagining
that God less is a means of gain here he
talks of one of the clearest examples of
a church leader or of a church that has
gone
Wayward they will follow
money and they will develop doctrines
that lead them to getting more
money and more money and more
money and they will never have enough
because they will never be
grateful they will just desire to be
rich and that whole rest of that passage
fills this out that those who desire to
be rich fall into
temptation into many senseless and
harmful desires that plunge people into
ruin and uh and destruction because the
love of money is a root of all kinds of
evil it is through this craving that
some have wandered away from the faith
and pierced them through with many pains
this is one of those things again here
we are not talking about true Christians
we are talking about false converts
false teachers those who wander away
from the faith why because the faith was
not enough for them why do they wander
away from the scriptures because the
scriptures are not enough for them why
do they wander away from the teachings
of Jesus Christ because the teachings of
Jesus Christ are not enough for
them why is it that false teachers are
always shown as teaching different
Doctrine and slowly sliding and
wandering away and
having sheep join them lulled into
safety because they haven't died
yet well it needs to be said that as we
go through these things Paul is making
no bones about it he is warning this
young Elder in the church Timothy about
these things he warns him again in 2
Timothy Chapter 2 but here he warns him
from the
positive Timothy here he is encouraging
him the types of of people and things to
avoid and this comes down to uh one of
the last things that he expresses
directly to just
Timothy he says to him here in 2 Timothy
2: 15- 19 do your best to present
yourself to God as one approved a worker
who does not need to be ashamed rightly
handling the word of Truth now again we
see the centrality of the scriptures we
see the centrality of revealed truth God
has revealed his truth in the word that
he has given to his people and I know
already people ah the the scriptures
weren't complete yet doesn't have to be
complete yet right Timothy lived at a
time where God had specifically ordained
that the scriptures were not yet
complete but what scriptures he had he
was to rightly
handle and that is directly applicable
to every single leader in the church you
are to rightly handle the revealed word
of God that has come down to you in our
age
it's the whole the whole Cannon of
scripture has come down to us God has
inspired it he has revealed this truth
and now we are to devote ourselves to it
and rightly handle it it means there's
wrong ways to handle the word of Truth
by the way by very
definition what does he say to him he
says but avoid irreverent
Babel
irreverent
Babble again quarrels over words
no substance myths
speculations profane and empty promises
always resulting in ungodliness that
spreads always look how he says this but
avoid a reverent Babel for it will lead
people into more and more ungodliness
and their talk will spread it will go
through the the flock just like Gang
Green among them are hus and fitus who
have swerved from the truth again always
the description of these false teachers
is this sliding this wandering this
swerving they start off okay and then
they just slowly get off course no false
teacher shows up to the church and says
ha Satan is actually
God that's not a false teacher that's
just straight up a crazy person a false
teacher in the way that Paul is talking
to the church in Ephesus a false teacher
is one who might even start off well but
then prove to have no Clarity no
Devotion to the
scriptures and no solidity in their own
right the foundation of the scriptures
and the words of Christ are Rock
Solid he says look at these two guys
they've swerve from the truth what what
have they done here's their different
Doctrine these two guys specifically
were saying that the resurrection had
already happened and they were upsetting
the faith of
some different doctrine that breeds fear
in Christians hearts and upsets their
faith but what does he say God's Firm
Foundation
stands and again the centrality of the
word of God will always override the
theories the speculations and the
myths of those who would lead the Church
of God
astray Paul is warning this young
Ephesian Elder named
Timothy about the qualities and the
habits and the teachings of false
teachers but the question to us must
come what are the individual Christians
to
do it's one thing to say that the church
should be protected by good leaders and
true leaders and true
teachers but what's what's the average
Christian to do I I imagine that the
majority of people who listen to church
history and theology are not pastors or
maybe even teachers I know there's
several of you who do but I would
imagine the majority of us are
Christians how can we protect ourselves
from false teachers let's say our our
our true teacher is asleep at the wheel
and there's a false teacher running
around the church how do we protect
ourselves what do we do and and so here
as far as for Paul's warnings to the
church in Ephesus he does it on the
whole as
well he takes this up in Ephesians
chapter
6 now I know for any of you who grew up
in a world or a church that was similar
to mine uh you will have come across the
whole armor of God before but I want you
to see it from this perspective of the
fact that Paul has been warning the
leader of this specific church about
false teachers arising over and over and
over and over again and here he gives
them seven
things six parts of the armor and a
seventh thing that protects them from
all of this it is Ephesians 6:
10-18 I want you to notice how many
times just as we read through this how
many times he talks about strength and
standing firm watch this finally he says
be strong in the Lord and in the
strength of his might put on the whole
armor of God that you may be able to
stand against the schemes of the devil
again what should come into your mind
what has he already warned them about
there are those who will swerve from the
faith teaching different doctrines they
will be uh going off into myths
irreverent Babel they will be going off
into the doctrines of demons they will
fall right into the devil's hands and
they will be self- deceived as they do
it the one of the main schemes of the
devil Devil's is to of the devil is to
arise false teachers in the church
because it is so effective at leading
people away from the word of God it is
so effective in making shipwrecks of
people's Faith now does that mean that
they have lost this or that I'm not even
to get into that discussion of eternal
security and everything else what I will
say is this be on guard you do not know
how destructive false teachers can be if
you think you know how destructive they
can be they can be twice as as much as
anything you can
think because here we are not wrestling
with flesh and blood that's exactly
what's going on here I have heard this
applied politically man put this
directly against the concept of false
teachers in the church we do not wrestle
against flesh and
blood the things that are at stake Are
the souls of those who hear we are to
devote ourselves to the word of God even
as Paul has said to to Timothy uh in
another place you are to preach the word
of God you are to be ready when it's
popular in season when it's unpopular
out of season reprove rebuke exhort with
all Clarity of
mind with all strength you are to devote
yourself to the word of God that is what
is able to grow people up not you not
your rules not your theology not your
philosophies and not that of the
church's history of church fathers or of
popes or of Bishops
no as a bishop myself
no my authority starts and stops with
what scripture says if I say something
that does not Accord with it is not
consistent with it it is right I am
wrong that applies to every single other
person I don't care how popular or
wellknown
we do not wrestle against flesh and
blood but against the rulers against the
authorities against these Cosmic Powers
over this present Darkness against the
spiritual forces of evil in the Heavenly
places in other words all of the forces
of Darkness have their eyes set on
wrestling with the
church the invisible
Church
how does it do
this I would argue one of the primary
ways it does it is taking young
Christians little lambs in the flock
and
slowly walking them
away from the rest of the
flunk slowly leading them to pastures
that do not feed them slowly starving
them
how are the Sheep to protect themselves
from these
wolves not only the
leaders but all the
Sheep they are to depend on the Lord
watch verse 13
therefore take up the whole armor of God
that you may be able to withstand in the
evil day and having done all to stand
firm stand therefore having fastened on
the belt of Truth
notice one of the aspects of a
protection against false
teachers against the forces of evil
present in a false
teacher
truth false teachers
lie false teachers lie to themselves
they lie to the Sheep they lie about
where they're going they promise life
and prove
death they want to be teachers of the
law they guide people into rules rules
that cannot breed
life and so what's the first part of
the armor of God it is
truth we do not serve the Lord by
lies excuse me we do not serve the Lord
by
insincerity we do so through
integrity and we put on the breastplate
of
righteousness that thing that's able to
protect all of our functioning organs so
that we continue to breathe and have
blood pumping through our
chests
righteousness a righteousness as Paul
says to the church in Philippi that is
not our
own that does not come from works of the
law a righteousness from God that
depends on faith that's Philippians
three this righteousness is worth the
loss of all other things we have ever
accomplished all works all good things
all
pedigrees
everything the righteousness from God
that depends on faith will protect
us you say a false teacher arises and
and calls anathemas down on
you what what power have their words to
say when God has expressed blessing to
those who trust in
Christ who has promised righteousness to
the one who has depended on
Christ who has promised life in place of
our death what strength have the
anathemas to
be on one who has trusted in Christ
verse 15 and as shoes for your feet
having put on the Readiness given by the
gospel of peace again how many of these
are the virtues of the Christian Life
the gospel of peace this is a protection
against the false teacher because what's
the false teacher going to rise up you
don't have peace with
God that's what that's what the false
teacher will lead you into he will take
advantage of your guilt he will take
advantage of your station in Life or
whatever the case may be to form you
into what he wants you to
be but you as a Christian Christi have a
responsibility to stand firm on what is
true on the righteousness gifted to you
by Christ the gospel of peace that has
brought between you and God lasting
peace here are the words of Romans
51 we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ
it is it is gifted to
us and the false teacher because he
knows that that is a place of great
solidity will hit right there
first right
there we have peace with God a peace
that nobody can take away
how is it that Romans 51 has done this
it has expressed it to us we have been
made righteous by faith we have been
justified by faith therefore we have
peace and some of the worst teachings in
the church's
history have wandered away from that
exact
truth and so Paul says the centrality of
Faith notice he's not talking about
looking back to a time you were baptized
or um ensuring that you have have given
enough Ms or that you have attended mass
or church services enough or none of
this what is he prescribing for the
church truth righteousness the Peace of
the gospel and in all circumstances
verse 16 take up the shield of Faith
your Reliance upon on Christ in any
situation will extinguish all the
Flaming darts of the evil one your
confidence in Christ will protect you
from wandering off after a false
teacher you say how can that be because
Christ will be enough for
you you won't look for
another the sacrifice of Christ on the
cross will be enough for you you won't
look for for
another the blood of Jesus Christ having
once been shed will be enough for you
you won't look for it
again Christ having come into the world
will be enough for you you will not
follow an antichrist saying look here's
the Christ there's the
Christ Christ will be enough for
you your confidence in the word of God
and it sufficiency will be enough for
you you won't be led astray by those who
are adding to it and teaching different
doctrines and more and more and more and
insisting that their developments their
extrapolations are absolutely binding on
you they
aren't Christ is bound to
us and we are bound to the
scriptures we are bound to their
Authority
we are not bound to an institution that
comes along later that insists it's the
only game in town
no we stand against those things not
because institutional churches are wrong
but because when they're wrong it is
very hard to correct
them and because they typically lead
people
away into wandering into
myths which many many many of the
institutional churches have absolutely
done so
they have made a monstrosity out of
Mary of
Peter we are
told to stand solidly on the truth we
are told to protect ourselves with the
righteousness that is gifted to us we
are told to stand firm on top of the
gospel of peace there is nothing that
can move our stance on this ground when
we realize through the justification
that faith has brought we have peace
with
God we are confident in him we place our
Reliance upon him we trust in the Lord
with all our
heart and we do not lean on our own
understanding or the understanding of
those who are unsatisfied with what God
has given in his word in his apostles
and
Christ verse
17 the last part of the dress number six
take the helmet of
salvation or excuse me numbers five and
six the helmet of salvation and the
sword of the spirit which is the word of
God I will simply point
out the helmet of salvation first of all
as as the book of Colossians says this
is the helmet of the hope of
Salvation this is our assurance that we
have been saved it protects prot our
head it protects our minds it protects
everything that we are why because
there's entire teachings that say we
cannot be assured that we are
saved that's utter
nonsense the scriptures make it clear on
dozens of
occasions that we are well aware that we
are known to be saved now can we be self
deceived yes this is why we analyze
ourselves
but the helmet of salvation is
completely meaningless if you cannot
know that you have it
on the sword of the spirit is the word
of
God it is our
only offensive
weapon we do not fight against false
teachers and Heretics and false
teachings with anything other than the
word of God
the word of God is the
scriptures not the not
the things that people have designed no
the word of God is that which proceeds
from the mouth of God we do not have
living prophets today and so we must
relegate that not to some oral teaching
that is unaccountable
for the word of God or or or written
down anywhere the word of God is the
scriptures we are built on the
foundation stones of the prophets and
the apostles Christ himself being the
Cornerstone that is the Old Testament
the New Testament and the
gospels that is Christ everything is in
the church we are here as supports for
the truth we are here as buttresses for
the truth but we as the church are not
the truth Christ is the
truth the word of his grace is the truth
the word of Christ is the truth the word
of God is the
truth and a lot of people when they're
talking through the whole armor of God
forget the last part here and that's
number seven praying at all times in the
spirit with all prayers and supplication
to that end keep alert with all
perseverance making supplication for all
the saints pray for one another to be
protected from wandering off into myths
and
fables because of how simple it is to
fall into to those
things you say then what should I look
for in a leader well thankfully Paul has
already taught this young Elder in
Ephesus how to do
that look at this far from it are those
who forbid
marriage far from it are those who would
wander off into fables and
myths far from it are those who would
become puffed up with conceit watch this
1 Timothy 3 1-7 the qualification for
elders overseers pastors Bishops the
exact same word same office is spoken of
in many different ways throughout the
New Testament that is undeniable by the
way the saying is trustworthy if anyone
aspires to the office of overseer Elder
he desires a noble task therefore an
overseer must be above reproach the
husband of one wife sober-minded
self-controlled respectable hospitable
able to teach not a drunkard not violent
but
gentle not
quarrelsome not
quarrelsome not a lover of money how
many of these things are the exact
opposite of the descriptions of the
false
teachers he must manage his own
household well with all dignity keeping
his children submissive again for those
things that arose later on in the church
is history th this list completely
annihilates the later practices that we
see in church history where leaders of
the church have to be celibate in
certain areas and have no children have
no wife no balance in life that marriage
brings but
instead
illegitimate according to 1 Timothy 3
and Titus 1
what do we see here he must manage his
own household well with all dignity
keeping his children submissive for if
someone does not know how to manage his
own household how will he care for God's
Church look at his
life it doesn't say does he believe all
the exact right things that's such
that's such an easy thing to fake
but you can't fake
this does he emulate the virtues of the
Christian Life or is he in it for
money does he emulate the heart of
scripture able to teach it
clearly does he live in it honestly or
is he overtaken by drunkenness and
violent outbursts of Wrath is he not
gentle is he just love to quarrel with
people over
words rather than to teach the whole
counsel of
God does he keep his children submissive
if he doesn't have children how's he
going to know how to handle the
church if someone does not know how to
manage his own household how will he
care for God's Church his life must be
in
order you must be able to weigh the
outcome of their faith and see if it is
something worthy of emulation or is he
slowly sliding
away slowly wandering off into myths and
conjecture and quarrels over words just
becoming something that doesn't even
resemble the scriptures in any
way I know there's people that listen to
this podcast and you are part of
traditions that have scripture and
tradition on on equal footings but let
me just say this at the very releast
your Traditions have to be consistent
with the
scriptures you know there's nothing
wrong with a practice that's bit of
difference in scripture right even Jesus
does this right the synagogue is nowhere
described in the Old Testament it it
came out during the inter testamental
periods and yet he attended synagogue
every
Saturday as did Paul in fact even as
Paul became a Christian he began all of
his missionary effort s wherever there
were Jews at the synagogue in the
city he must not be a recent
convert or he may become puffed up with
conceit and fall into the condemnation
of the
devil how easy it is to become a false
teacher how easy is it to be self-
deceived time will
show whether or not someone is a false
teacher you can't make a perfect call on
them in an
instance you have to watch them over
time what is happening are they standing
firm or are they
sliding nobody ever accidentally slides
into the
truth you are sliding towards error
what does he say in verse 7 moreover he
must be well thought of by Outsiders so
that he might not fall into disgrace
into a snare of the
devil these qualifications for church
leaders are severely
important what does a true teacher look
like he looks like
that what are their qualities what do
they look like exactly they have sound
Doctrine
they do not teach different Doctrine
than the apostles they teach what the
apostles taught they have
integrity
humility a love for God and
others they are
faithful they do not slide and wander
off into myths they
are
pced with scripture they are satisfied
with it it is sufficient for them they
are sufficient with Christ his rightous
n is enough now I will live out of that
knowledge not out of the idea that it's
not enough and I got to fill up
it they are
selfless they are
patient they are
gentle they exude godliness discernment
prayerfulness they are able to be taught
they are able to
teach in a word
wisdom the wisdom of this world but most
importantly the wisdom from Heaven that
the Book of James is all
about and above all their commitment to
scripture which is their primary defense
against their own errors they do not
hesitate to submit themselves
to if they find that their tradition or
their beliefs or their teachings are
violative of scripture they submit to
scripture as a reflex that is a good
teacher then the bigger question is then
what do you look
like it's fine to say this about the
teachers of the church but how about
you do you see these qualities in you or
do you see a slow
slide to traditions and myths and
theories and
extrapolations are you satisfied with
the word of God that he has
spoken or do you desire
more do you just look at the commands of
scripture and say yes but my tradition
says this this and this that's call for
concern this isn't just about false
teachers this is about seeing if you are
following a false teacher are they
encouraging you in you sound
Doctrine are they encouraging in you
integrity and
humility a love of God and
others
faithfulness
selflessness
patience godliness
gentleness all the fruits of the spirit
are they encouraging these things in you
look at your own life as you're
following them are you sliding away from
these or are you being encouraged into
to
them are you able to be
taught are you then also able to teach
are you growing in wisdom is your
commitment to scripture emulating a
healthy
approach Christ had the highest view of
scripture that ever there was it is
unbreakable it is necessary that be
fulfilled is
inevitable it's
amazing sometimes you should look into
how Jesus thought treated and thought
about the scriptures even in their
uncompleted
form why is this
important because the Apostle warns us
wolves will
arise we must be on guard both as
teachers elders and overseers of the
church caretakers of people's Souls but
also as
Christians we must be able to have a
discernment enough to know whether or
not we are following a false
teacher it will affect you in very
predictable ways I pray that God gives
us all wisdom and insight and
discernment and most of all a love and a
satisfaction with Christ and his word
above all Traditions institutions and
Kings may God bless you all
[Music]
[Applause]